## Up In the Air

By Gaurav Sood and Derek Willis

The run of good fortune enjoyed by Darren Sammy in pre-match coin tosses during the World Twenty20 [caught the notice](http://www.espncricinfo.com/icc-world-twenty20-2016/content/story/994611.html) of commentators and journalists. On the way to the Twenty20 World Cup, Sammy called ten consecutive tosses correctly. 

Leave aside the conspiracy theorists---the chance of calling out the side of the coin left facing the sky after the flip ten times in a row is just a shade less than 1 in a thousand, but over many many matches, a streak as long as 10 becomes almost certain---for a second. And focus on the more fundamental question: How much of a difference does winning the toss make? The general feeling is that it is a lot. For only strongly held gut feeling that tosses matters a lot---and by a lot, we mean winning a toss being considered the same as theft of a game---can explain the hard to comprehend [recent changes in the English County Championship](http://www.espncricinfo.com/county-cricket-2016/content/story/944565.html).

After analyzing data from more than 44,000 cricket matches across formats, however, we find, that there is generally just a small, though material, advantage of winning the toss. The benefit varies widely, across formats, conditions, and how closely matched the teams are. We find that the team that wins the toss wins the match 2.8 percent more often. But that small advantage increases for one-day matches and decreases for Twenty20 contests. For day-night ODI and List A matches, the advantage is greater still, with the side winning the toss winning nearly 6 percent more games. (Our full write-up and the underlying data are [here](https://github.com/dwillis/cricket-stats).)

Winning the toss does appear to convey a greater advantage (2.6 percent difference between winners and losers) in First Class and Test matches, where pitches can deteriorate, giving the team that bats last a tougher challenge. But the largest boost appears to be in one-day matches, where teams that win the toss win the match 3.3 percent more often.

None of this proves that winning the toss guarantees a team an increased chance of winning every time, of course. The outcome depends on many things, including whether teams are able to capitalize on the toss advantage matters. It probably did not hurt that Sammy had the bowlers to make an immediate impact against England in the World T20 final. A weaker team may have seen little benefit.

Our findings might not change the minds of captains who, having lost the toss, apportion it some blame in the post-match press conference. "But you have to realise it was half an hour early start, a bad toss to lose," M.S. Dhoni [told reporters](http://www.espncricinfo.com/icc-world-twenty20-2016/content/story/993955.html) after India's loss to the West Indies in the World T20 semifinals. Certainly dew can be a factor during evening contests, but of all cricket's formats, T20 matches showed the smallest benefit for the toss-winner (and thus the smallest disadvantage for the loser). The advantage shrinks even further in day-night T20 contests.

Playing conditions, which occupy a large portion of pre-match commentary, matter as well. It's not surprising that we found that in ODI, List A and T20 matches where the Duckworth-Lewis rule was invoked, teams that won the toss won the match even more often than when full matches were played. These findings probably won't reassure critics of Duckworth-Lewis, since in theory winning the toss in should convey approximately the same benefit regardless of whether the match is shortened. Perhaps there is some inherent bias in Duckworth-Lewis that makes winning the toss even more important.

Other factors influence the outcome of a cricket match, not the least of which is the quality of the sides involved. Using ICC monthly rankings for international sides, we looked at whether winning the toss made a difference when teams were closely matched or at opposite ends of the rankings. When closely matched teams play, winning the toss has a larger impact on the probability of winning. As expected, the impact of winning the toss was less when a clearly better side played a weaker one.

We also looked at international side performance: are some countries better than others at capitalizing when they win the toss? The data aren't clear on this: there are small but insignificant boosts for most sides, with the exception of New Zealand. The Black Caps seem to do better in matches where they lose the toss, while Sri Lanka and India seem to enjoy the greatest benefit.

To try to counter some of the advantages that home sides could enjoy in English domestic matches and to encourage spin bowling, English County Championship matches this season will not have a mandatory toss. The visiting team can choose to field first, and if not, then the toss occurs. The data on the impact of winning the toss in England are similar to the overall picture - a small but significant advantage is gained by the side that wins the toss - with one glaring exception: matches played in April.

Whether due to cold weather or to grassy pitches that can make batting difficult, teams that won the toss in April matches in England lost nearly 5 percent more often than they won. In every other month, the toss-winner was more likely to win the match. Perhaps that alone will encourage visiting captains to take the field first, at least at the start of the season.
